The single most dangerous object known
to humanity. Quite a quote, isn't it?
Well, this refers to comet Swift Tuttle,
also known as
109P, the 109th periodic comet in an
orbit that takes about 133 years to go
around the sun. It's a classic Halley
style comet that goes on a long thin
orbit from the inner solar system out to
the outer
reaches and it passes close to the Earth
every time it comes through the inner
solar
system. First discovered by Swift and
Tuttle in July of 1862 and reported
independently by these two astronomers.
And that's uh Swift's drawing of the
object on the right hand side
there. They reported that it was quite
bright, as bright as Polaris, the pole
star. Now, as with
many recorded discoveries, what you then
do is go and look back through the
historical record and see if anybody
else has recorded or just noted
the observations in previous years. And
in fact, Chinese records from the year
188 report a sighting of a
comet magnitude 0.1. So very bright
indeed, as bright as the some of the
brightest
stars. And there are observations going
back to 69 and even 322
BCE recording this same object. So it's
been seen over many years. That gives us
an excellent long baseline over which to
predict its orbit and understand what's
going on. Now, the last time it came
through was in
1992, but back in 1902, it was suggested
that the comet was seen in 1737 by
Ignatius Kegler. And that that
particular object on the 3rd of July of
that year was in fact the same object
that had been reported by Swift and
Tuttle. And on that basis, Brian
Marsden, very famous astronomer from the
Minor Planet Center over in Boston,
calculated that a return of this object
would occur in 1992.
and Japanese astronomer whose name I
won't try and pronounce. You can read it
there.
Kuchi picked it up in that year and it
became bright enough to see with a
decent pair of
binoculars. But again, the date of its
perihelion that Marsden had predicted
was just 17 days in error. So not
exactly right and you might have
expected that to be more accurate. Now,
it was last observed after three years
having passed the sun in April 1995 on
its way back out of the uh inner part of
the solar system. It was 8.6 AU from the
sun. So, getting on for the orbit of
Saturn and heading back out into the
frozen parts of the outer solar system
out beyond Neptune and Pluto for a while
on its long thin orbit. And that orbit
is shown in this lovely animation here.
This is uh showing the orbit of the
comet diving into the inner solar system
there and then sweeping back out. So the
perihelion point, the closest approach
to the sun, comes as close as the
Earth's orbit, just tucks inside one
astronomical unit from the sun. And
that's the blue orbit there. And then it
goes out past the outer planets and it
actually goes just further away than
Pluto. And you can see that second track
that it's uh following on the purple
line there is not a
perfect repeat of the first one. We'll
let that run again. So there it goes
passing the Earth coming back. And the
white lines, the verticals are
indicating equal time intervals and also
the height above or below the equatorial
plane of the solar system, the ecliptic.
So you can see it's slightly tilted. So
there it's coming in for a second pass.
And as it comes out again out beyond the
orbit of Pluto, the track is not quite
the same. That's because it's been
perturbed by the effect of the gravity
of the other planets on the way
past. Now, another feature of its orbit
is that it seems to be in an 11:1
orbital resonance with Jupiter. So,
Jupiter goes around the sun in about 12
years and Swift Tuttle in 11 times that.
Um, and that fits together very neatly.
And so the effect of an 11:1 orbital
resonance means
that Swift Tuttle keeps seeing Jupiter
at different positions alternating in
its orientation as it comes in for a
pass of the inner solar system. So the
perturbations end up canceling out in
the long
run. But Swift Tuttle is in what's
called a retrograde orbit. it's going
the wrong way around the sun by
comparison to all the major
objects. And so although this resonance
has been tracked back um to being in
place for about a thousand years, it
probably began around then. We're not
entirely sure because our observations
don't go back too far, only back to
about 2,000 years ago.
But in the time we've been observing it,
the orbital period has varied from about
128 years to about 136
years, possibly oscillating backwards
and forwards between the two as the
interactions with Jupiter and the other
planets pull it back and forth. But
eventually with it being retrograde and
typical of these
orbits in a few thousand years time it
will get a major perturbation and be
thrown into a different path. So these
can be really difficult to predict over
the long run. Now the next visit and we
got a lovely animation of the next visit
here as well.
2126. It'll be bright enough to see with
the naked eye getting up to that zero or
one magnitude, 0.7 perhaps. And that's
because it's going to pass us quite
closely. And you can see it above the
plane of the solar system as the purple
object with the Earth in blue. And it
dives down through the Earth's orbit and
just uh passes by before ducking
underneath and heading on its way.
And the other thing that this simulation
is showing is the velocity. You can see
the the uh lines, the white lines get
further apart. They're equal time
intervals. So as they get further apart,
the comet is going faster and that's
shown on the bottom of the screen there.
So it's up to about 30 kilometers/s of
orbital velocity. And as it dives in
towards the sun, it picks up speed and
you watch as it crosses the Earth's
orbit coming up about now it's up to 41
and then it starts slowing again as it
moves away from the sun and in distance
increases and that 41 km/s is quite fast
and you have to add to that of course
the relative velocity. The earth is
going around the sun at 18 kilometers
per second. So the uh potential for
these two closing on each other is
something of the order of 60 kilometers/
second relative speed. Now Swift Tuttle
is by far the largest near earth object.
The nucleus of it 16 miles 26 kilometers
in diameter. This is a very substantial
object indeed.
And the picture there is not of SW Swift
Tuttle. It's comet Temple One taken up
close and personal by the Stardust probe
that went to visit that particular
comet. That's only 7.6 kilometers in
diameter along its long axis. And it
weighs in at 80 billion tons. Swift
total
is 7 uh 7 time.6 times about three um
maybe 3 1/2 times the diameter and it
weighs in at 6 trillion tons. So 6
trillion tons of material traveling
relative to the earth at about 60
km/s that is a tremendous amount of
energy.
So, what's the possibility that this is
going to hit the earth at some point?
Well, the Daily Mail, newspaper in the
UK, not renowned for its truth and uh
balance, said researchers now say it's
going to miss the Earth and pass us
within 14 million miles. I think they
mean pass us by 14 million miles. But of
course, the graphic that they used with
this uh headline was the one on the left
there of an absolutely monstrous sized
object far far larger than Swift Tuttle.
I mean, Swift Tuttle is 62 km. That
thing hitting the Earth, well, that's
about a quarter of the Earth's diameter.
So, that's about 2,000 um kilometers
across, something like that, maybe even
3,000. It's enormous. Um, and so they're
saying it's going to miss us and drawing
an impact of the most monstrous um,
asteroid, far bigger than actually even
the largest of the asteroid series
smashing into the earth. So well done
chaps exaggerating as
usual. Slightly more sainely, Forbes in
2017 said Swift Tuttle will not hit the
Earth in 2126. There had been some
speculation that this was a possibility.
As is often the case, a lack of data
leads to a range of possible outcomes
and the uh more data we've acquired, the
more we've been able to pin it down. But
in preparing this talk, I looked up on
uh the internet and the AI response is
absolutely wonderful. What it absolutely
said was in connection with Swift Tuttle
hitting the Earth, it said even if it
did, the gravitational interactions with
other celestial bodies in our solar
system are unpredictable and it could
potentially impact the Earth in the
future. But for now, we are safe for the
next few thousand years. That sentence
makes absolutely no sense because it
says even if it did
hit that it could could get perturbed
and then might hit
us. Really it it it's just nonsense. And
so I caution you against using AI to
write your exam answers because
literally although it's grammatically
correct, it's a complete
nonsense.
Anyway, the consequences of an impact of
this large comet nucleus hitting the
Earth would be absolutely
catastrophic. 60 km/s and a 60 kilometer
diameter object weighing 6 trillion
tons. The energy of impact would be the
equivalent of an unccalculable millions
of hydrogen bombs exploding all at
once. 27 times more kinetic energy than
the impactor that struck at Chickixaloo
66 million years ago and wiped out the
dinosaurs. So this would be an
extinction level event and it is for
that reason that we are watching Swift
Tuttle very very carefully because of
those pertubations of its orbit just to
make sure it's not going to hit us
anytime
soon.
And this is why it was described as the
most dangerous object known to humanity.
This would be absolutely
devastating. What the data however says,
never mind what the media says, is that
it will pass by in 2126 on the 5th of
August with a close approach of 22.9
million kilometers. So further away than
the Daily Mail said. and that the next
pass after that in
2261 slightly later in the month on the
24th will be slightly closer at 22
million kilometers. So we have a couple
of hundred years for sure. If we look
further into the future, the prediction
is that in the year
344 it will approach within just two
million kilometers. still further away
than the moon. So, it's not going to hit
us then
probably. And 1,400 years further into
the future, so 2 and a half thousand
years from
now, in the year
4479, there is a 1 in a million chance
that it will strike the Earth. That's
still very, very, very unlikely.
But in the end, eventually with enough
passes, impact is
inevitable. And that is why it's the
most dangerous object known to man. Not
that it's going to hit us in the next
2,000 years, but we have plenty of time
to track, monitor, and prepare what
we're going to do about it. Um, and
indeed if we work out that there is a
risk of deflecting needing to deflect
it, we will have plenty of time to do
so. But that might one day be necessary
in the distant future.
Now, for the moment, bits of Swift
Tuttle fall into our atmosphere every
year, creating the Percied meteor
shower. One of the best meteor showers
of the
year, visible, radiating away from the
constellation of Perseus. So, nicely
placed from our point of view. And this
is because the Earth is passing through
the track of Swift Tuttle at that point.
That is the intersect between the path
of the comet and the Earth's orbit. And
we go through a cloud of debris that's
been left behind by Swift Tuttle on
previous passes. And a lot of that
material falls into the atmosphere and
makes shooting stars or meteors, most of
which burn up and fail to make it to the
ground because they're relatively small.
One or two of them can be a bit larger.
There's one in the mid left there that's
brighter than all the others. And when
they're that bright, we would probably
describe them as a fireball rather than
just a meteor. Uh, and they can be very,
very impressive
indeed. Well, these fireballs from Swift
Tuttle are very interesting. William
Kirk, NASA engineer, charted the paths
of the fireballs associated with Swift
Tuttle and the tracks are shown in his
image on the right
here. And the common factor for all of
these orbits of these fireballs worked
out by tracking back where they must
have been, having observed them from
different observing sites on the ground,
either visually or with radar. um then
you can track
the direction that they've come from and
work out what their orbit must have
been. And all their orbits of all of
these fireballs seem to intersect the
Earth's orbit at one point traveling in
a
common direction.
What this suggests is a common origin
for all these fireballs and that they
emanated from the earth all at the same
time
perhaps. And if that's true then it must
have been fairly recently by which I
mean thousands of years not millions or
anything
longer. In the long run, the tracks of
all these small solar system bodies,
small asteroids, comets and meteors are
unstable because of the pressure of the
solar wind driving them and also because
of the interactions with the planets. So
the fact that all this lot is still
lining up tells us that there hasn't
been a very long time for those other
subtle effects to scatter them all over
the solar
system. And what William Cook's paper
proposes is that there might have been
an encounter with Swift Tuttle, an
actual impact or very near impact with
the Earth in the past. So rather than
looking to the future for an impact,
what about looking
back in the what happened before? And
his proposal is that there was what's
called a skip impact where the main body
of swift Tuttle came in at a very low
glancing angle and just clipped the
Earth's surface. It would have
penetrated down in through the
atmosphere, creating an enormous shock
wave, possibly uh then breaking into
several parts, but some of those parts
would have hit the ground and a lot of
material then thrown outwards and
perhaps the main body of Swift Tuttle
bounced off and carried on in its way,
either bouncing off the ground or
bouncing off the atmosphere. And we have
seen objects do this and hit the Earth's
atmosphere and bounce away like a stone
skipping on a pond. But maybe if it
broke up in the process due to the shock
of entry into the Earth's atmosphere at
such high speed, some parts of it would
have skipped and some would have made it
to the ground.
And perhaps this explains why there are
so many particles that are still
traveling in orbits that emanate back
from this skip impact event. Now comets
don't hit the earth very often and a
skip impact would be a bit of a freak
occurrence but it's not
impossible. And the paper goes further
and suggests that perhaps we have
already seen the impact site and maybe
it's Lake Michigan. So the outline of
Lake Michigan is the black line on this
diagram drawn in overlay on top of a
false color
3Dized image of Orcus Patera which is a
feature on
Mars. And the feature on Mars has all
the characteristics of a long oblique
skip impact where a body came in and hit
the ground and bounced away again into
space, gouging this long thin elliptical
trench with a fat end and a thin end at
the top there and a scarp ridge all
around the edge. and very smooth
internally. Just a couple of craters
that have hit since the event and
peppered it with a few craters there. So
this we're not certain this could be a
skip impact on Mars. We see the evidence
of the Messier craters on the moon where
an object bounced and then relanded
further down range on the moon. Uh, but
this one looks like it may have gouged a
chunk and then gone back out into space.
An entirely possible
outcome and somewhat similar to the
shape of Lake
Michigan. And if we look at the Great
Lakes and we look at them with false
color, giving us that altitude map 3D
kind of
effect, what we can see is that perhaps
the comet came in at a very low angle,
shattered into a few fragments, and some
of them made it to the ground, creating
these five elliptical depressions, four
of them in Michigan and one up there in
Lake Superior, which could well be
impact
sites. When we look at Lake Michigan,
the northern region of it there is
heavily scarred due to glaciation and
that looks to have been carved out by
glacias. But the elliptical regions are
not so marked. They are free of these
glacial impressions. And that suggests
that they were formed by a different
process and probably afterwards more
recently than the ice has been there.
Otherwise, they would uh be not able to
be on top of and erasing the glacia
features. So this could be the evidence
for a glancing blow perhaps from swift
Tuttle about
12,70013,000 years ago. Has to be fairly
recent for the fireballs not to have
dispersed. And that could correspond
with the impact that is associated with
what's called the younger dry event, a
catastrophic extinction of the megapora
bit, the large beasts of North America
and parts of Northern Europe. And this
could be associated with this impact
event. We've never been able to find the
crater of whatever it was that hit the
ground that caused this younger dry
event. Uh but perhaps it's been staring
us in the face and it is in fact these
elliptical holes in the ground in the
Great
Lakes. So I think that's a fascinating
twist to the tale. We're worrying about
the fact that we might be hit by a swift
tuttle at some point. And maybe it's
actually already done so. And maybe the
AI isn't so stupid after all in that it
uh can go on after a skip impact and be
perturbed by the planets of the solar
system and come round for another pass.
Maybe we won't be quite so lucky next
time and we might suffer a direct hit
like the Daily Mail is talking about.
But not an object that size that's
thousands of kilometers across. So, I
hope you've enjoyed that stop whistle
stop tour of the comet Swift Tuttle, the
most dangerous object known to man.
Thanks very much for listening.